Mainspring Energy Tech Library

Company Overview

Mainspring Energy, Inc. is a clean energy technology company based in
Menlo Park, 1 2

California, focused on developing a new category of power generation:
the linear generator . The company was founded in 2010 by three Stanford
University engineering Ph.D. students – Shannon Miller, Matt Svrcek, and
Adam Simpson – who sought to improve the efficiency of distributed power
generation

3 4

. Mainspring’s mission is to advance global access to low-carbon,
dispatchable energy by delivering 5

breakthrough onsite power solutions . The founding team spent nearly a
decade in R&D (developing and 6 2

testing three prototype generations) before launching its first
commercial products in 2020 . Backed by top-tier investors such as
Khosla Ventures, Bill Gates, and others, Mainspring has raised
significant 7 8

capital to scale its technology and business . Key highlights in the
company’s history include:

•

2010: Founded as EtaGen by Shannon Miller (CEO), Matt Svrcek (CTO), and
Adam Simpson (Chief 3 4

Commercial Officer) at Stanford’s Advanced Energy Systems Lab . Initial
seed funding was provided by Khosla Ventures.

•

2020: Rebranded to Mainspring Energy as the company prepared to
commercialize its linear 1

generator technology . Began first customer installations, entering the
~$750 billion global 9

electrical equipment market for onsite power .

•

2021: Unveiled the 250 kW Mainspring Linear Generator as a new product.
Announced a $150 million purchase and deployment agreement with NextEra
Energy (parent of Florida Power & 10

Light) to install Mainspring generators across the U.S. . Raised a
$95 million Series D investment 8

led by Devonshire (Fidelity), bringing total funding to $228 million .
Early pilot units were deployed with Fortune 100 customers like Kroger
and with utility Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) for 11 12

microgrid resiliency .

•

2022: Fuel-flexibility breakthrough – demonstrated successful operation
on 100% hydrogen and 13

100% ammonia fuel, without hardware modifications . Closed a Series E
financing of 14 15

$290 million (led by Lightrock), bringing cumulative funding to over
$500 million . Entered strategic pilot projects, including a memorandum
of understanding with utility AEP (American 16

Electric Power) for multi-unit trials and a 100% landfill biogas pilot
installation in Yolo County, 17

California .

•

2023: Won a Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF) Pioneers Award for its
role in accelerating 18

deployment of zero-carbon fuels (e.g. hydrogen) in power generation .
Continued to grow deployments and manufacturing capabilities.

•

2024: Expanded operations into Texas via a deal to deploy generators at
five Lineage Logistics facilities (the world’s largest cold storage
company) to provide resilient onsite 20

power . Launched a reseller partner program and formed a strategic
partnership with Schneider 21 22

Electric to integrate Mainspring’s fuel-flexible generators into
microgrid solutions . •

2025: Announced a Series F funding of $258 million to scale production,
with new investors 15

including Amazon’s Climate Pledge Fund . This brought total funding to
well over $600 million. 1

Added prominent industry leaders to its board and established a
Strategic Advisory Board of data center and utility experts (e.g. former
Microsoft and Google data center executives) to guide growth 23 24

in those sectors . By 2025, Mainspring reported having “hundreds of
megawatts” of capacity 25

either operating in the field or in advanced development projects ,
reflecting the rapid scale-up of its deployments since first shipping
units in 2020.

Technology Overview

Mainspring’s Linear Generator is a novel electromechanical generator
that directly converts chemical fuel energy into electricity using
linear motion instead of traditional rotary motion. In a Mainspring
generator, a mixture of fuel and air undergoes a low-temperature
“flameless” reaction that drives magnets through 26

copper coils to produce electric current . Unlike an internal combustion
engine, there is no spark plug or flame; instead, the fuel/air mix under
compression in a controlled reaction, pushing two pistons linearly. This
linear motion is converted to electricity via an integrated linear
alternator, without 27 28

a crankshaft or turbine . The device’s software actively controls the
reaction and piston dynamics to maintain high efficiency and
flexibility. This fundamentally different architecture yields a
combination of features and benefits that set the linear generator apart
from conventional generators:

•

High Efficiency: By directly converting reciprocating motion into
electric power, the linear generator

maximizes the expansion of gases and minimizes mechanical losses. It
achieves about 46% net electrical efficiency (AC) on natural gas –
comparable to or higher than many engines or 29

microturbines in its class . High expansion ratios in the Mainspring
design allow more energy to be extracted from each fuel charge, and the
absence of a crankshaft means no energy is wasted 30

converting linear motion to rotation . This efficiency approaches
fuel-cell levels of performance 31

but with a simpler system .

•

Fully Dispatchable & Fast Response: Mainspring’s generator is designed
for load-following and

rapid on/off capabilities. It can ramp from zero to full power almost
instantaneously to match 32

changing demand or stabilize microgrids . The system supports black
starts (starting up without grid power) and can seamlessly island from
the grid, making it ideal as a backup or microgrid 33

backbone for resilience . Precise power electronics enable sub-second
adjustments in output, 32

helping balance renewable fluctuations and grid frequency in real time .

•

Fuel Flexibility: A core innovation of the linear generator is its
ability to run on a wide range of

gaseous fuels – including natural gas, renewable biogas, propane,
hydrogen, and even ammonia 34 35

– and to switch between fuels on the fly via software control . The
adaptive control system adjusts compression and timing in real-time to
accommodate different fuel properties, so the same unit can use
conventional fuels today and transition to 100% zero-carbon fuels in the
future without 13 35

hardware changes . This “future-proof” fuel flexibility is unique; by
contrast, most engines or

36

turbines require physical modifications to use hydrogen or other new
fuels safely and efficiently

35

. Mainspring’s linear generators have successfully demonstrated
high-efficiency operation on 13

100% hydrogen and 100% ammonia in testing . •

Ultra-Low Emissions: The device’s flameless combustion process keeps
peak reaction 37

temperatures below the threshold at which nitrogen oxides (NOx) form
(around 1,500 °C) . As a result, NOx emissions are near-zero – measured
<1.5 ppm (@15% O₂) which is a >90% reduction 38 39

compared to typical reciprocating engines . Particulate emissions are
also extremely low since there is no traditional combustion flame. This
enables the Mainspring generator to meet the strictest air quality
regulations and operate in locations where diesel gensets are restricted
due to pollution

38

. Greenhouse gas emissions are also reduced relative to the grid when
running on natural gas 2

(due to high efficiency), and can be eliminated entirely by using biogas
or green hydrogen as fuel

40

.

•

Low Maintenance & Cost: The linear generator’s design has only two
moving parts (the two 41

oscillating pistons) and uses standard industrial materials . It does
not require oil lubrication – the pistons are supported by an air
bearing system – and it has no complex gearbox, crankshaft, or 41 42

costly catalysts to replace . This simplicity translates to lower
upfront cost and maintenance requirements compared to engines or fuel
cells. Mainspring expects longer maintenance intervals and life, since
there are fewer wear-prone components and operating temperatures are
relatively low. (In practice, ensuring long-term durability of the
piston seals and moving components is a key 43 44

engineering focus, and Mainspring’s patents reflect innovations in these
areas .) Overall, the company touts a cost per kW that is highly
competitive, delivering “the high efficiency and low

31

emissions of fuel cells with the low cost and dispatchability of engines
and microturbines.”

•

Modular, Scalable Deployment: Mainspring’s product is packaged in a
turn-key 20‑foot container 45

with built-in inverters and controls for easy installation . Each base
unit currently provides ~250 kW and can operate independently or in
parallel with others. The system is inherently modular – multiple units
can be sited together to reach multi-megawatt scale (up to ~18 MW per 46

acre footprint) . This allows customers to start with a small
installation and add capacity as needed. The containerized design and
lack of noise (<70 dBA at 3 m) means the generators can be 47

placed in commercial or urban locations with minimal site preparation .
The units connect to standard 480 V three-phase electrical
infrastructure, and when fueled by pipeline gas (or onsite fuel 48 49

tanks), they provide reliable power on either side of the utility meter
.

Technical Deep Dive

Operating Principle: The Mainspring linear generator operates on a
free-piston linear alternator concept. At its core is a reaction chamber
where a mixture of air and fuel is admitted. On each side of this
central chamber is a linear electromagnetic machine (stator coils and a
moving magnet assembly), and at 50

the outer ends are air-filled chambers acting as “springs” . During
operation, a cycle proceeds as follows: fuel and air flow into the
central chamber, and movable pistons (also called oscillators) on each
side 51 52

compress the mixture by moving toward the center . When the mixture is
compressed to the right conditions, it causes a flameless chemical
reaction – This reaction rapidly releases energy, sharply raising the 51
53

pressure in the chamber . The high-pressure gases push the two pistons
outward (away from the 28

center), converting the chemical energy directly into kinetic energy of
the pistons . As the pistons move outward, the magnets attached to them
slide through the surrounding copper stator coils, inducing an electric
current – this is the linear generator’s equivalent of what a rotating
generator does with a 28 27

spinning rotor . When the pistons reach the end of their stroke, the
outward motion compresses the

54

air in the end chambers, creating an air spring that then bounces the
pistons back toward the center

55

. The coils generate additional electricity on the inward stroke as the
magnets pass by in the reverse

direction. The cycle then repeats with a fresh charge of fuel-air
mixture. Importantly, the compression/ expansion process is not
mechanically constrained by a crankshaft – the pistons’ motion is
controlled electromagnetically and can be adjusted each cycle. This
allows fine-tuned control of the compression 56 57

ratio and timing of the reaction, which is crucial for different fuels
and operating conditions . For example, hydrogen fuel reacts at a lower
compression than ammonia; Mainspring’s control system can accommodate
such differences by altering piston travel and when the reaction is
initiated, all via software, 56 58

to always achieve the optimal compression ratio . This adaptive control
is a major innovation – it solves the challenge that in a conventional
engine with a crankshaft, the

3

piston motion is fixed and cannot adapt, making HCCI (homogeneous charge
compression ignition) difficult 57

to control . Mainspring’s system actively manages each cycle, which is
why it can handle variable fuels and loads while maintaining stable
operation.

Engineering Innovations and Patents: Mainspring’s design incorporates
several patented solutions to enable this novel generator. The company’s
patents (over 45 issued U.S. patents and 20 international patents as of
2024) cover areas such as the piston assembly, sealing and friction
reduction, generator 59

control algorithms, and multi-unit operation . One key aspect is the use
of air bearings and advanced 43 60

piston seal assemblies to allow nearly frictionless motion of the
oscillators without lubrication oil . Traditional piston engines require
oil to reduce friction and seal the combustion gases, but Mainspring’s
linear generator avoids oil by using a cushion of air and specially
engineered seals, eliminating oil changes and the risk of oil-related
emissions or maintenance . Another patented area is the adaptive control

42

system that monitors piston position, velocity, and chamber pressure in
real time and adjusts the input energy each cycle. This control
software, together with modern power electronics, effectively makes the
linear generator’s operation software-defined, allowing features like
precise load following and fuel switching with a simple software update
. The generator’s power electronics also handle grid

34 61

synchronization and conversion of the variable-frequency generated AC
into stable output power, including 62 63

meeting UL 1741 SA requirements for grid interconnection . Because the
linear generator ties the mechanical motion directly to electrical
generation (the pistons slow down as they generate electricity,
providing inherent damping and control), it avoids the uncontrollable
“explosive” combustion problem of free-piston engines in the past. The
result is a machine that can achieve high efficiency in a real device,
not just in theory: early testing showed the flameless reaction approach
can be as efficient as a fuel cell in extracting energy . Mainspring’s
successful prototypes and field units have validated the core

64

technology, and the company continues to refine aspects like power
scaling (for larger units), durability (e.g. ensuring the oscillators
and springs last for many millions of cycles), and integration with
energy storage and control systems. Overall, the intellectual property
and engineering know-how Mainspring has accumulated over 14+ years give
it a significant head start in the linear generation field; industry
analysts have noted that Mainspring appears to have “locked up” key IP
for linear generators, creating a moat 43 65

against potential competitors in this space .

Products and Deployments

Product Specifications: Mainspring’s first commercial product is a
250 kW (0.25 MW) linear generator system, packaged as a ready-to-install
unit. Each system consists of two 115 kW linear generator cores 66 67

working in tandem inside a standard shipping container (approximately
20.5’ × 8.5’ × 9.5’ in size) . The generator produces 400–480 V
three-phase AC output, suitable for commercial and industrial power 68

needs . Key specs of the Mainspring Linear Generator product include:

•

Rated Output: 250 kW_net (AC) per containerized system. Multiple units
can be paralleled for multi 69

megawatt projects (e.g. >1.5 MW installations use several modules with
external inverters) . The technology is highly scalable – an array of
Mainspring units can achieve power densities up to 46

~18 MW per acre .

•

Fuel Input: Compatible with natural gas, biomethane (landfill or
digester gas), propane,

hydrogen, and ammonia (in various blends or 100%). Fuel is supplied at
5–20 psig pressure (low 70

pressure gas pipeline or tank) . No external water supply is required
(unlike fuel cells or some 71

engines that need water for cooling or exhaust treatment) .

4

•

Electrical & Control: The unit integrates grid-tie inverters and control
systems and is certified to 63

UL 2200 (stationary generator) and UL 1741 SB (advanced inverter)
standards . It supports remote monitoring and control, allowing it to
participate in microgrid control or demand response programs. Power
quality is actively managed by the inverter, providing stable frequency
and voltage to the customer load or grid as needed.

•

Performance: ~46% net electrical efficiency (LHV) on natural gas or
biogas, measured at full load 72

(15 °C, 1 atm) . Notably, the efficiency remains high even at part
loads, since the linear generator can modulate output without throttling
losses (unlike combustion engines that lose efficiency when partially
loaded). The unit can ramp from 0 to 250 kW in seconds, and supports
unlimited on/off 33

cycling, making it well-suited for intermittent operation or following
solar output .

•

Emissions & Noise: Certified <1.5 ppm NOx (@15% O₂, dry) without
aftertreatment – essentially no 47

exhaust after-treatment required to meet even California’s stringent air
quality rules . CO and VOC emissions are also very low due to the lean,
flameless combustion. Sound level <65 dBA at 47

10 m distance (about the noise of a normal conversation) . This quiet
operation is achieved through acoustic insulation of the enclosure and
the inherently smoother operation of linear motion (no loud explosions
or high-speed turbines).

•

Maintenance: Expected maintenance is infrequent – there are no oil
changes (the system is oil-free),

and no consumable catalysts. The primary scheduled service would be
inspection or replacement of air filters, and long-term refurbishment of
seals if needed. Mainspring has not publicly disclosed mean time between
maintenance, but emphasizes a low total cost of ownership due to minimal
41 42

maintenance and high efficiency .

[]

Mainspring’s 250 kW linear generator system installed in its enclosure
(about the size of a parking space). Each unit contains two linear
generator cores and built-in power electronics, delivered as a turn-key
container for easy deployment.

5

Deployment Scenarios: The flexibility of Mainspring’s generators enables
a wide range of applications on 48

both the customer side and the utility side of the meter . Common
deployment scenarios include:

•

Commercial & Industrial (C&I) Onsite Power: Many early Mainspring units
have been installed at commercial facilities to provide peak shaving,
backup power, and cost savings. For example, the grocery chain Kroger
deployed Mainspring generators to cut energy costs and ensure backup
power 11

at stores . The units run on pipeline natural gas but can switch to
biogas or hydrogen blends as 73

those become available, aligning with corporate sustainability goals .
Data centers and manufacturing plants are also target customers, using
linear generators for reliable on-premises generation that can offset
grid usage and provide resilience. In one high-profile deployment, a
cluster of Mainspring generators was installed to power the largest
electric truck charging depot 74

in the U.S., operated by Prologis and Maersk in Southern California . By
providing on-site generation, this project avoids straining the grid
during EV charging and ensures the depot has round-the-clock power for
fleet operations.

•

Microgrids and Utility Grid Support: Mainspring has partnered with
utilities to use linear

generators in community microgrids and substations. Notably, in 2021
PG&E piloted a 240 kW Mainspring generator in Napa County, CA, at a
microgrid site to provide backup power during 12 75

wildfire-related outages . The unit runs alongside (and is expected to
eventually replace) a diesel genset, dramatically reducing local air
pollution while improving reliability. Because the Mainspring can ramp
quickly and respond to automatic generation control signals, it can also
help regulate voltage/frequency on the grid. American Electric Power
(AEP), a major utility, signed an 76

agreement in 2022 to pilot Mainspring generators for distributed grid
support in their territory . These utility deployments demonstrate that
linear generators can provide “virtual power plant” capabilities –
acting as distributed power assets that utilities dispatch as needed for
capacity or balancing, especially as more solar and wind come online.

•

Renewable Firming and Remote Sites: Mainspring units are being used to
firm renewable energy

and power remote sites. For instance, Yolo County in California is
piloting a Mainspring generator 17

running on 100% landfill biogas, turning a waste methane stream into
useful electricity on-site . This project highlights the generator’s
ability to use low-BTU fuels that might be challenging in engines. In
remote or off-grid locations, Mainspring generators (due to black start
and islanding capability) can serve as the primary power source or work
in concert with solar panels and batteries to form a reliable microgrid.
They offer an alternative to diesel gensets for telecom sites, islands,
and remote communities, especially where fuel availability might shift
towards renewables over time.

•

Data Centers and Critical Infrastructure: Data centers require highly
reliable power, and typically

use diesel backup generators. Mainspring is positioning its linear
generators as a cleaner, fuel flexible backup or even primary power
source for data centers. In 2024 Mainspring entered a strategic
partnership with Schneider Electric, a leader in data center power
systems, to integrate 21

linear generators into Schneider’s EcoStruxure Microgrid solution for
data centers . The idea is to enable data centers to deploy on-site
generation that can run on natural gas now and transition to hydrogen
later, reducing dependence on diesel and grid constraints. Members of
Mainspring’s advisory board (like Google’s and Microsoft’s former data
center energy leads) underscore the 24 77

interest in this technology for that sector . Hospitals and campuses
that need 24/7 uptime are another use case – they can use Mainspring
units for both emergency power and to shave peak loads.

As of 2022–2023, Mainspring reported dozens of units deployed across
multiple customer sites and a backlog of orders as more organizations
pilot the technology . Customers mentioned in public

78 11

releases include Kroger (retail), Lineage Logistics (cold storage
warehouses), PG&E and Florida Power & 6

11

Light (utilities via NextEra), and various commercial real estate and
industrial sites . The NextEra Energy $150   million contract has been a
key driver, as NextEra’s distributed generation group is deploying 10 79

Mainspring generators under energy-as-a-service contracts for end
customers across the U.S. . This model allows customers to host the
generators and purchase power from them (rather than owning the
hardware), lowering the barrier to adoption.

Looking ahead, Mainspring is developing larger-capacity versions of the
linear generator to serve bigger facilities and utility-scale needs. The
current 250 kW module was a starting point; higher power models
(potentially in the 500 kW to multi-MW per unit range) are expected as
the technology matures, especially since the linear architecture can be
expanded in length or with more reaction chambers. In the meantime, the
company’s focus remains on scaling manufacturing and fulfilling orders
for its existing product, while supporting installations in diverse
scenarios from EV charging hubs to microgrid communities.

Team and Culture

Mainspring Energy’s team is composed of experienced engineers,
entrepreneurs, and industry experts unified by the company’s mission of
enabling a resilient, low-carbon grid. The company’s leadership includes
its three co-founders in top executive roles – Shannon Miller (Chief
Executive Officer), Matt 80 81

Svrcek (Chief Technology Officer), and Adam Simpson (Chief Commercial
Officer) . All three met as Stanford Ph.D. students and have led
Mainspring since inception, with Miller as the public-facing CEO driving
vision and partnerships. They are joined by senior executives such as
Scott Gebicke (Chief Operating Officer), David DeGraaff (SVP of
Engineering), Ryan Fletcher (Chief Financial Officer), Maria Amundson
(Chief Communications Officer), and Haben Goitom (General Counsel),
among others on the 82 83

management team . This leadership group brings experience from top
companies in the power sector, technology, and manufacturing, which has
helped Mainspring navigate from R&D to commercial product delivery.

The company culture at Mainspring is often described as innovative and
collaborative, grounded in a set of core values that guide how teams
operate. Mainspring highlights three primary values: Pragmatic 84 85

Optimism, Excellence Without Ego, and Proactive Collaboration .
“Pragmatic Optimism” reflects a balance of ambitious vision with
practical problem-solving – employees are encouraged to tackle big 84

challenges in clean energy with creativity, while staying grounded and
efficient in execution . “Excellence Without Ego” denotes a focus on
high-quality work and technical rigor, paired with humility and
continuous learning; even as Mainspring hires top talent (including
Ph.D.-level engineers and experienced industry 86

professionals), a humble, customer-focused attitude is expected .
“Proactive Collaboration” underscores cross-disciplinary teamwork –
mechanical, electrical, and software engineers work closely together,
and the company values inclusion and respect in interactions, extending
to partnerships with customers and 87

external partners . These values are more than slogans – they influence
hiring (Mainspring’s interviews probe for cultural fit and teamwork
skills) and how projects are managed internally. For instance, the
development of the linear generator required mechanical and electrical
engineers to solve problems side by side, and the culture encourages
that kind of integrated collaboration.

Mainspring’s workforce has grown rapidly in recent years. From a small
core team in the early 2010s, the 88

company expanded to roughly 400 employees by 2022 after its major
funding rounds , and continues to hire across engineering,
manufacturing, sales, and customer support functions as production
scales up. Notably, Mainspring is establishing a new manufacturing
facility in Pennsylvania (with government support) which is expected to
create nearly 600 new jobs in the coming years, indicating the company’s
transition

7

into large-scale production and the accompanying talent needs. The
organization structure includes not just product development and
engineering, but also field service teams that commission and maintain
units at customer sites, and a growing commercial team that works on
project development with clients and financing partners.

To support its growth and industry reach, Mainspring has assembled a
strong advisory network and governance. Its Board of Directors and
investors include well-known figures in cleantech (e.g. investors like
Bill Gates and firms like Khosla Ventures, Shell Ventures, Chevron
Technology Ventures, etc. are backers) . In 2025, the company formed a
Strategic Advisory Board specifically to bolster its

89 90

presence in the data center and utility sectors . This advisory board
features leaders such as

91 92

Christian Belady (a pioneer in data center energy efficiency from
Microsoft), Joe Kava (who led data center operations at Google), Phyllis
Currie (former utility executive at LADWP), among others – all of whom
bring deep domain expertise . Their guidance is helping Mainspring
tailor its product and market

93 77

approach to these key industries.

Mainspring’s company culture also emphasizes the broader mission –
employees are often drawn to the company by the opportunity to work on
technology that addresses climate change and grid reliability. The
company frequently notes that it is “solving essential problems” in the
energy transition and that every 94

employee’s work contributes to providing reliable, affordable, cleaner
electricity . This mission-driven ethos, combined with the excitement of
bringing a first-of-kind hardware product to market, has been a selling
point in recruiting talent. Mainspring has been recognized in awards
like Fast Company’s innovative companies and has a positive reputation
in the cleantech community for reviving hardware innovation in an era
that had seen many clean energy startups falter. The team takes pride in
accomplishments such as winning the IEEE Emerging Technology award
(2024) for its linear generator 95 96

innovation and being named to the Global Cleantech 100 list . These
accolades and a sense of purpose contribute to an energetic culture
aimed at growth and impact.

Market Positioning

Mainspring Energy has positioned its linear generator as a disruptive
addition to the distributed energy market, offering capabilities that
span the benefits of engines, turbines, and fuel cells while mitigating
many of their drawbacks. Traditional on-site generation is dominated by
diesel and natural gas reciprocating engines (e.g. gensets from
Caterpillar, Cummins) and by smaller gas microturbines or emerging fuel
cell systems (like Bloom Energy’s solid oxide fuel cells). Mainspring
enters this landscape with a solution that is fuel-flexible, cleaner,
and potentially more economical for many use cases. As CEO Shannon
Miller puts it, the linear generator is intended to deliver “electricity
more cleanly, at a lower cost and more flexibly” than the incumbent
technologies, including multi-billion-dollar markets of turbines, 97

engines, and fuel cells . In effect, Mainspring aims to carve out a new
category that can complement and eventually displace traditional
generators in certain segments, especially where emissions and future
fuel compatibility are critical.

Competitive Advantages: One of Mainspring’s key differentiators is its
ability to seamlessly switch between fossil fuels and zero-carbon fuels.
This is increasingly important as industries look to decarbonize.
Competing generator manufacturers (Cummins, Wärtsilä, Mitsubishi,
Siemens, GE, etc.) have announced or are developing engines and turbines
capable of running on hydrogen or ammonia blends, 36 98

but those typically require specific models or retrofits for each fuel .
None of those conventional products are designed to regularly switch
between different fuels without hardware changes – they are

8

35

usually optimized for one fuel at a time . Mainspring’s generator, by
contrast, was built from the ground up to be fuel-agnostic. This means a
customer can install a Mainspring unit to run on natural gas today and
35 73

be confident it can transition to hydrogen in the future, “without
having to be replaced” or rebuilt . This future-proofing is a strong
selling point for companies worried about asset longevity in the face of
changing regulations or fuel availability. As Miller noted, “Customers
don’t know which fuels are going to be available when… They don’t want
to buy a system and then encounter some regulatory or cost change they
didn’t

73

anticipate. This [linear generator] allows them to shift to fuels based
on what’s available and low-carbon.”

Another advantage is emissions compliance and sustainability. In many
markets (California, for example), tightening air quality rules are
making it harder to deploy traditional combustion generators due to NOx
and particulate emissions. Fuel cells solve that emissions problem but
are expensive and not fuel flexible. Mainspring offers a near-zero NOx
profile without expensive after-treatment, which is a compelling
proposition for urban areas and commercial sites that must meet strict
permits . This has been

38

highlighted as communities push back on diesel gen-sets; Mainspring
allows reliability without pollution in 99

those contexts .

In terms of cost and economics, Mainspring claims that once scaled, its
linear generators will have lower lifecycle cost than fuel cells and
potentially competitive upfront cost with engine gensets (especially
when factoring in no emissions control equipment needed for compliance).
The linear generator’s high part-load efficiency and fast response also
enable value stacking – e.g. one unit can do peak shaving (saving on
electricity bills), provide backup power, and participate in grid
services like demand response, maximizing its 100 101

economic utilization . This multi-use capability can out-compete
single-use backup generators that sit idle most of the time. The
partnership with NextEra to offer energy-as-a-service (leasing the
generators with a power purchase agreement) further enhances the cost
proposition by eliminating upfront cost for 79

customers .

Market Trends: Mainspring’s rise comes at a time of converging trends in
the energy landscape. There is surging interest in distributed energy
resources (DERs) and microgrids to improve resilience against 100 102

outages from wildfires, storms, and grid constraints . The increasing
frequency of extreme weather events has made reliable backup power a
priority for businesses and communities. At the same time, there is a
strong push to reduce reliance on diesel due to climate and health
concerns. Mainspring’s generators align with these trends by providing
resilient power that can run on cleaner fuels. Another trend is the
integration of renewables and the need for firming capacity – as solar
and wind penetration grows, there is a market need for flexible
generation that can fill in when the sun isn’t shining or wind isn’t
blowing. The linear generator’s fast ramping and dispatchability make it
a good candidate to firm local renewable generation, acting as a “glue”
in hybrid systems (solar/storage/gen-set combinations) .

103 104

Governments and regulators are also moving toward technology-neutral
approaches that reward low emissions and flexibility, which could
benefit Mainspring. For instance, incentive programs like California’s
SGIP now support technologies using biogas or renewable fuels (which
Mainspring qualifies for), and the U.S. Inflation Reduction Act of 2022
provides production credits for hydrogen usage that could indirectly
help Mainspring if its customers use hydrogen fuel. In October 2024,
Mainspring’s selection for a federal manufacturing grant was a signal
that policy-makers see promise in this technology for domestic clean 19

energy manufacturing .

9

Competitors and Alternatives: Mainspring is not alone in targeting the
clean onsite power market, but it’s unique in its technical approach.
Competing solutions include:

•

Natural Gas Engine Microgrids: Companies like Enchanted Rock and Scale
Microgrid Solutions 105

install fleets of natural gas reciprocating engines for backup power and
peak shaving services . These have the advantage of maturity and low
cost, but they still have notable NOx/CO₂ emissions and are generally
not designed for hydrogen without engine modifications. Engine gensets
also require more maintenance (oil, overhauls) and have lower efficiency
at small scale compared to Mainspring’s linear generator.

•

Fuel Cells: Bloom Energy and FuelCell Energy offer stationary fuel cell
systems (typically 200– 106

300 kW modules) that provide ultra-clean power using natural gas or
hydrogen . Fuel cells have higher electrical efficiency (~55–60% for
Bloom’s solid oxide) and zero NOx. However, they require high-purity
fuel (no biogas without extensive cleanup), cannot easily switch fuel
types, and respond slowly to load changes. They also have high upfront
costs and stack replacement costs. Mainspring is often viewed as sitting
between engines and fuel cells – not as ultra-efficient as fuel cells,
but much cheaper and more flexible, while being cleaner than engines. In
data centers and other markets, Mainspring could directly compete with
Bloom’s Energy Servers as a cleaner alternative to gensets.

•

Microturbines and Stirling Engines: Niche technologies like Capstone
microturbines (30–200 kW

range) and Stirling engines have been used for distributed generation.
Microturbines are compact and low-emission (when using recuperation) but
typically only ~30% efficient and struggle at part load. Stirling
engines can run on various fuels and are clean, but they have low power
density and haven’t scaled well commercially. Mainspring’s linear
generator can be seen as a more robust alternative – offering higher
efficiency than microturbines and more power density than Stirling
engines, with fuel flexibility in both cases.

•

Emerging Linear Generator startups: As of mid-2020s, Mainspring is the
clear leader in

commercializing linear generators, but some others are exploring related
concepts. For example, in 107

the transportation realm, Hyliion has looked at a linear generator range
extender for trucks . Large engine makers have also undoubtedly
researched free-piston engines historically. 43 65

Mainspring’s broad patent coverage may pose a barrier to newcomers .
It’s worth noting that the linear generator concept was studied in labs
(including at Sandia National Lab and by automotive companies) in the
past, but Mainspring appears to be first to turn it into a viable
product at commercial scale.

Given these comparisons, Mainspring’s market positioning emphasizes
flexibility and transition readiness. The company often highlights that
its product can serve current needs (e.g. reliable backup power, peak
shaving at lower cost than grid) today with existing fuels, while being
ready for tomorrow’s zero 73

carbon fuels – essentially providing a bridge to a decarbonized future
without stranding assets . This message resonates with customers who
have sustainability goals but can’t yet get pure zero-carbon energy
24/7. Additionally, by marketing the linear generator as a “dispatchable
renewable” (when run on biogas or hydrogen produced from excess
renewables), Mainspring taps into the trend of 24/7 carbon-free energy
solutions (important for tech companies and others with round-the-clock
clean power targets).

Market Share and Traction: As a still-private company, Mainspring’s
exact sales figures aren’t public, but it has reported a strong
pipeline. The NextEra contract ($150 million) alone implied dozens of
units to be installed (possibly on the order of 100+ units). The
company’s statement of “hundreds of MW in development” suggests a
significant volume of orders/options, though some of those may be future
25

commitments . Mainspring’s approach to market has been to partner with
established players (e.g. 108 109

NextEra, Schneider, and resellers like Kinsley Energy Systems in the
generator distribution space ) 10

to reach customers. This is a practical strategy to penetrate a market
that typically relies on trusted generator OEMs and engineering firms.
If Mainspring continues to execute and if field deployments demonstrate
reliability at scale, the company could start capturing a notable share
of the backup power and distributed generation market, especially in
regions with strict emissions rules or high renewable penetrations.

In summary, Mainspring Energy is positioning itself not just as a
generator manufacturer, but as an enabler of the modern grid: providing
local generation that is clean, flexible, and future-ready. Their linear
generator stands at an intersection of multiple trends (resilience,
decarbonization, decentralization), which, if the technology performs as
promised, gives the company a chance to be a key player in the evolving
energy ecosystem.

News and Updates

Recent developments and news about Mainspring Energy underscore its
rapid progress and industry momentum in the past few years:

Major Funding Rounds: Mainspring has attracted substantial investment to
fuel its growth. In •

September 2022, the company closed its Series E funding at $290 million,
one of the largest 110

financings for a distributed energy hardware startup . This round was
led by Lightrock and included strategic investors like Princeville
Capital (whose Limited Partners include industry players) and Chevron
Technology Ventures, among others . In April 2025, Mainspring

8

announced a $258 million Series F financing, joined by investors such as
Amazon’s Climate Pledge 111 15

Fund, Temasek, and DCVC, and bringing on energy industry veterans to its
board . These investments pushed Mainspring’s total funding over $600  
million and are being used to scale manufacturing, expand deployments,
and accelerate product development.

•

Manufacturing Expansion: In October 2024, Mainspring was awarded an
$87 million grant from

the U.S. Department of Energy to establish a new manufacturing facility
for linear generators in 19

  Allegheny County, Pennsylvania . This grant – part of a federal effort
  to onshore clean energy manufacturing – will support a large-scale
  production line and is expected to create hundreds of jobs.
  Pennsylvania’s state government also provided incentives to attract
  Mainspring’s expansion, highlighting the economic development aspect
  of the clean tech industry. The new factory will significantly
  increase Mainspring’s production capacity beyond its initial Menlo
  Park pilot manufacturing line, enabling the company to fulfill its
  growing order backlog.

•

Strategic Partnerships: Mainspring has entered partnerships to extend
its market reach. A notable collaboration is with Schneider Electric
(announced March 2024), where Schneider will integrate Mainspring’s
fuel-flexible linear generators into its microgrid offerings for
commercial and industrial customers . Schneider, a global leader in
energy management and backup power systems,

21

provides an established channel to data centers, hospitals, and other
critical facilities, lending credibility and integration expertise to
Mainspring’s solution. Mainspring also launched a reseller program in
mid-2024, signing up a network of distributed energy providers and
engineering, procurement & construction (EPC) firms (e.g., Kinsley
Energy Solutions, ABM, and others) to sell and install its generators
across different regions . This channel strategy accelerates

108 109

deployments by leveraging partners’ local presence and customer
relationships. Furthermore, Mainspring has ongoing strategic investor
relationships with utilities like American Electric Power

11

(AEP) and NextEra Energy that not only invested but also pilot the
technology in their operations

112

.

•

Notable Deployments: Several high-profile deployments have been
publicized, demonstrating the

versatility of Mainspring’s generators. In May 2024, it was announced
that Mainspring units are powering the nation’s largest electric truck
charging depot, a facility in Los Angeles operated by Prologis for
Maersk’s fleet of electric trucks . This project is a landmark for
heavy-duty

74

transportation electrification and showcases how onsite generation can
enable new, large electricity loads (charging dozens of trucks) without
waiting for grid upgrades. In September 2024, Mainspring revealed an
agreement to deploy generators at five facilities of Lineage Logistics
in Texas .

20

Lineage, a global cold-chain storage company, will use the linear
generators to provide reliable, cost effective power (especially during
peak grid periods) and to maintain backup power for refrigerated
warehouses – an application where both resilience and fuel flexibility
(potentially using biogas from food waste in the future) are attractive.
Earlier, in late 2022, Mainspring announced its first 100% landfill
biogas pilot with Yolo County, proving the generator’s ability to run on
waste-derived fuel and eliminate flaring of methane . And one of the
first utility adoptions was by PG&E in 2021,

17

where a Mainspring generator now supports a wildfire-prone distribution
node, reducing the use of diesel during grid outages . These case
studies in different sectors (transportation, cold

12 75

storage, waste-to-energy, utility microgrid) illustrate the broad
potential market for the technology.

Awards and Recognition: Mainspring’s innovations have garnered industry
accolades. In April

•

2023, BloombergNEF named Mainspring one of its BNEF Pioneers,
specifically recognizing the company for “Accelerating the Deployment of
Clean Hydrogen” – an acknowledgement of 18

Mainspring’s ability to use hydrogen/ammonia fuels in its generators .
Mainspring was also listed in the Global Cleantech 100 and featured by
the World Economic Forum as an innovator in the Energy Transition (as
part of WEF’s initiative on cleantech startups) . In 2024, Fast Company

113

honored Mainspring in its Innovative Companies rankings (energy
category), and the IEEE awarded 114

Mainspring an Emerging Technology Award for the development of the
linear generator . Such recognition from independent experts and media
provides validation and raises Mainspring’s profile among customers,
investors, and prospective hires. It signals that the company is viewed
as a leading innovator tackling the challenge of clean, reliable power –
which aligns with the needs of a modern grid.

•

Advisory Board Formation: In August 2025, Mainspring announced the
formation of a Strategic 91

Advisory Board to support its growth in key markets . This board’s
members include heavy hitters from the data center industry (e.g.,
Christian Belady, who designed Microsoft’s data center energy strategy,
and Joe Kava, who led Google’s data center operations) as well as
utility sector 93 77

leaders (such as former executives from NextEra and large public
utilities) . Their role is to advise Mainspring’s leadership on product
roadmaps, market entry strategies, and partnerships in their respective
domains. The creation of this board indicates Mainspring’s focus on
tailoring its solutions to the needs of data centers (which prize
reliability and sustainability) and utilities (which require
grid-friendly, scalable solutions) – two critical adoption arenas for
the technology. It also reflects the company’s increasing maturity, as
it seeks guidance to navigate regulatory, operational, and scaling
challenges.

In conclusion, Mainspring Energy has rapidly evolved from a research
project into a commercial contender in the energy sector. Its linear
generator technology is gaining real-world traction through a series of

12

deployments and partnerships, backed by strong financing and a growing
support ecosystem. As the world’s energy systems transition to more
distributed and cleaner models, Mainspring’s progress will be closely
watched. The company’s recent news – from technical achievements (like
running on 100% ammonia) to strategic deals (like the NextEra contract
and Schneider partnership) – all point to its ambition to become a major
player in distributed, dispatchable clean generation. If Mainspring
continues on its current trajectory, it could play a significant role in
how businesses and utilities approach reliable, flexible power
generation in the years ahead, providing a key tool for both
decarbonization and resiliency in the

electric grid.
